---
title: Fears and Anxieties
draft: true
---

Being the spouse of a trans woman requires having pride. Pride in your wife, pride in your marriage, pride in your family. You have to have the courage to face the world and say "Yes, this is my wife, she is a woman in spite of what the world says, and I love her for being a woman." Katharine does not have that courage, she does not have that pride. She's not even proud of being bisexual, she doesn't want to be seen as a lesbian. She is too afraid of the world, too scared of the unknown and what horrors lie in wait.

As much as her feminist beliefs reject it, Katharine is a damsel in distress. She needs her spouse to be her protector, a knight in shining armor to take on the hard foes and keep her from harm. I knew this when we were dating, it was part of what drew me to her. She is a codependant person, and I asked her to marry me knowing full well that I was accepting that role, to be her knight. I have failed at that role. My very existence as a trans person introduces _more_ risk into her life. Not only am I no longer the strong husband, my very existence makes her life harder.

Although she will deny this, I know she feels this herself. I see it every time we go out together as two women. I feel it every time I switch into my male clothing so that we can do something as a family, and see how much more at ease she is engaging with the public. She has told me how much she fears having to tell people that she has a wife, or worse, that her spouse is transitioning. I cannot protect her from those fears, I cannot shield her from the scorn that will inevitably be sent our way. That anxiety, that vulnerability, it harms her.

Last year we had a dog, a mix breed named Oswald. Ozzy was a beautiful dog, extremely loving, a wonderful family pet. He was also two times larger than we expected to be getting when we took him in as a puppy, and completely a poor fit for our home. He needed constant exercise and stimulation, he needed space to run and to live. We could not provide those things for him, and ultimately we chose to re-home him with a family that could. Both he and our family are now better off because we made that choice.

Much like how Ozzy was more than we bargained for, I have been more than Katharine bargained for. She did not sign up to be the spouse of a transgender woman. She had no idea this was coming. I suddenly grew into a dog much too large for her life, and now she is struggling to keep things in order. She needs a husband, she needs a protector. I am not her Ned Stark, I'm not even her Brianne of Tarth.

Having had that protection and then having it ripped away... that is painful. That pain, that fear, that misery, it isn't fading, it is recurring, and the longer it continues the more likely it is to breed into resentment and anger. When she gets hurt, when her walls come down, that anger is clear as day. She contains it with her anti-depressants, but it's still there. How can I ever believe she will be satisfied to have a wife when it is so clear that what she needs and wants is a husband?

Why should I be so selfish as to deny her that? She won't ever admit this to herself. She will stay with me to the end, out of love, out of commitment, out of a desire to keep her children in a two parent household. She will never release herself from my burden.

This is my fear, this is the place I go when things are down. It is not that Katharine will leave me. My fear is that she _should_ leave me, and wont.